What is blood pressure?
Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is called diastolic pressure.
Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually the systolic number comes before or above the diastolic number. For example, 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80.
How is high blood pressure diagnosed?
High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. They will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis.
Blood Pressure Category
Systolic Blood Pressure

Diastolic Blood Pressure
Normal
Less than 120
and
Less than 80
Elevated
120 - 129
and
Less than 80
High Blood Pressure Stage 1
130 - 139
or
80 - 89
High Blood Pressure Stage 2
140 or higher
or
90 or higher
Hypertensive Crisis (dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away)
Higher than 180
and
Higher than 120


For children and teens, the health care provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and sex.
What are the different types of high blood pressure?
There are two main types of high blood pressure:
* Primary, or essential, high blood pressure. This is the most common type of high blood pressure. For most people who get this kind of blood pressure, it develops over time as you get older.
* Secondary high blood pressure. This is caused by another medical condition or use of certain medicines. It usually gets better after you treat that condition or stop taking the medicines that are causing it.
Why do I need to worry about high blood pressure?
When your blood pressure stays high over time, it causes the heart to pump harder and work overtime, possibly leading to serious health problems such as heart attack, stroke, heart failure, and kidney failure.
What are the treatments for high blood pressure?
Treatments for high blood pressure include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines.
You will work with your provider to come up with a treatment plan. It may include only the lifestyle changes. These changes, such as heart-healthy eating and exercise, can be very effective. But sometimes the changes do not control or lower your high blood pressure. Then you may need to take medicine. There are different types of blood pressure medicines. Some people need to take more than one type.
If your high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or medicine, treating that condition or stopping the medicine may lower your blood pressure.
High blood pressure (also called hypertension) is a serious illness that affects nearly 65 million adults in the United States. High blood pressure is often called a "silent killer" because many people have it but don't know it. Over time, people who do not get treated for high blood pressure can get very sick or even die.
What does high blood pressure do to your body?
High blood pressure can cause life-threatening illnesses like kidney problems, stroke, heart failure, blindness, and heart attacks.
Who is at risk?
Anyone can have high blood pressure. Some people are more likely to have high blood pressure including:
* African Americans
* People over age 55
* People with a family history of high blood pressure
Your chances of having high blood pressure are higher if you:
* Are overweight
* Eat foods high in salt
* Do not get regular exercise
* Smoke
* Drink alcohol heavily
What are the signs of high blood pressure?
Many people with high blood pressure do not feel sick at first. The only way to know for sure is to get your blood pressure checked by a doctor or other health professional.
How is high blood pressure treated?
There are medicines people can take every day to control their high blood pressure. Only your doctor can tell if you need to take medicines.
Understanding your blood pressure: What do the numbers mean?
When you have your blood pressure taken at the doctor, you are told 2 numbers like 120/80. Both numbers are important.
The first number is your pressure when your heart beats (systolic pressure). The second number is your pressure when your heart relaxes (diastolic pressure).
Your blood pressure goes up and down during the day, depending on what you are doing. Brief rises in blood pressure are normal, but the higher your blood pressure stays, the more at risk you are.
If your blood pressure is often greater than 140/90, you may need treatment.
If your blood pressure is greater than 120/80, and you have other risk factors, like diabetes, you may need treatment.
How does high blood pressure affect pregnant women?
A few women will get high blood pressure when they are pregnant. When pregnant women get high blood pressure, it is called preeclampsia or toxemia.
How do I control my high blood pressure?
* Check your blood pressure.
* Take your high blood pressure medicine every day if needed.
* Exercise often.
* Eat foods low in salt.
* Lose weight or keep weight at a healthy level.
* Do not smoke.

